Generic App Layer Keywords
==========================

.. _rule-keyword-app-layer-protocol:

app-layer-protocol
------------------

Match on the detected app-layer protocol.

Syntax::

    app-layer-protocol:[!]<protocol>(,<mode>);

Examples::

    app-layer-protocol:ssh;
    app-layer-protocol:!tls;
    app-layer-protocol:failed;
    app-layer-protocol:!http,final;
    app-layer-protocol:http,to_server; app-layer-protocol:tls,to_client;
    app-layer-protocol:http2,final; app-layer-protocol:http1,original;
    app-layer-protocol:unknown;

A special value 'failed' can be used for matching on flows in which
protocol detection failed. This can happen if Suricata doesn't know
the protocol or when certain 'bail out' conditions happen.

A special value 'unknown' can be used to match on a protocol being
not yet known. It can not be negated.

The different modes are
* direction : protocol recognized on the direction of the current packet
* to_server : protocol recognized in the direction to server
* to_client : protocol recognized in the direction to client
* either : tries to match protocols found on both directions
* final : final protocol chosen by Suricata for parsing
* original : original protocol (in case of protocol change)

By default, (if no mode is specified), the mode is ``direction``.

.. note:: when negation is used, like ``!http``, it will not match on the
   "unknown" state in the flow.

Here is an example of a rule matching non-http traffic on port 80:

.. container:: example-rule

    alert tcp any any -> any 80 (msg:"non-HTTP traffic over HTTP standard port"; flow:to_server; app-layer-protocol:!http,final; sid:1; )

.. _proto-detect-bail-out:

Bail out conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Protocol detection gives up in several cases:

* both sides are inspected and no match was found
* side A detection failed, side B has no traffic at all (e.g. FTP data channel)
* side A detection failed, side B has so little data detection is inconclusive

In these last 2 cases the ``app-layer-event:applayer_proto_detection_skipped``
is set.


app-layer-event
---------------

Match on events generated by the App Layer Parsers, the protocol detection
engine, or the file decoder.

Syntax::

  app-layer-event:<event name>;
  app-layer-event:file.<event name>;

Examples::

    app-layer-event:applayer_mismatch_protocol_both_directions;
    app-layer-event:http.gzip_decompression_failed;
    app-layer-event:file.Z_DATA_ERROR;

Protocol Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

applayer_mismatch_protocol_both_directions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The toserver and toclient directions have different protocols. For example a
client talking HTTP to a SSH server.

applayer_wrong_direction_first_data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some protocol implementations in Suricata have a requirement with regards to
the first data direction. The HTTP parser is an example of this.

https://redmine.openinfosecfoundation.org/issues/993

applayer_detect_protocol_only_one_direction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Protocol detection only succeeded in one direction. For FTP and SMTP this is
expected.

applayer_proto_detection_skipped
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Protocol detection was skipped because of :ref:`proto-detect-bail-out`.

File Decoder Events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file decoder raises events using the ``file.`` prefix when decompression
of SWF (Flash) files fails.  These events are protocol-agnostic and can match
on any traffic, so ``alert ip`` is recommended over ``alert tcp``.  They also
appear in EVE output as anomaly events.

file.NO_MEMORY
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Memory allocation failed during file decompression.

file.INVALID_SWF_LENGTH
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The decompressed length field in the SWF header does not match the actual data.

file.INVALID_SWF_VERSION
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The SWF version field contains an unrecognised value.

file.Z_DATA_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

zlib decompression of the SWF body reported a data error.

file.Z_STREAM_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

zlib decompression reported a stream error (invalid block type or similar).

file.Z_BUF_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

zlib decompression reported a buffer error (output buffer too small).

file.Z_UNKNOWN_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

zlib decompression failed with an unrecognised error code.

file.LZMA_IO_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

LZMA decompression encountered an I/O error.

file.LZMA_HEADER_TOO_SHORT_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The LZMA compressed stream header is truncated.

file.LZMA_DECODER_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The LZMA decoder returned an error during decompression.

file.LZMA_MEMLIMIT_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

LZMA decompression exceeded the configured memory limit.

file.LZMA_XZ_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An error occurred in the XZ container layer wrapping the LZMA stream.

file.LZMA_UNKNOWN_ERROR
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

LZMA decompression failed with an unrecognised error code.

.. _rule-keyword-detect-event:

detect-event
------------

Match on events raised by the detect engine itself.  Unlike
``app-layer-event``, these events are not tied to an application-layer
protocol and can fire on any traffic, including flows where no app-layer
parser is active (e.g. bare SCTP).

Syntax::

  detect-event:<event name>;

Examples::

    detect-event:TOO_MANY_BUFFERS;
    detect-event:POST_MATCH_QUEUE_FAILED;

Event names are case-insensitive.

These events are transient: they are reset at the start of every detection
run and do not persist across packets.  A rule using ``detect-event`` stays
eligible for re-evaluation on every subsequent packet in the flow.

TOO_MANY_BUFFERS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The detect engine reached its per-packet limit on the number of inspection
buffers.  This can indicate an unusually complex or adversarially crafted
request that is stressing the detection engine.

POST_MATCH_QUEUE_FAILED
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A post-match action (e.g. storing a file or marking a flow) could not be
queued because the internal post-match queue is full.

app-layer-state
---------------

Match on the detected app-layer protocol transaction state.

Syntax::

    app-layer-state:[<>]<state>;

Examples::

    app-layer-state:request_headers;
    app-layer-state:>request_body;
