doc/userguide/rules/rule-lua-scripting.rst, before:

.. _lua-scripting:

Lua Scripting
=============

Syntax:

::

  lua:[!]<scriptfilename>;

The script filename will be appended to your default rules location.

The script has 2 parts, an init function and a match function. First, the init.

Init function
-------------


.. code-block:: lua

  function init (args)
      local needs = {}
      needs["http.request_line"] = tostring(true)
      return needs
  end

The init function registers the buffer(s) that need
inspection. Currently the following are available:

* packet -- entire packet, including headers
* payload -- packet payload (not stream)
* http.uri
* http.uri.raw
* http.request_line
* http.request_headers
* http.request_headers.raw
* http.request_cookie
* http.request_user_agent
* http.request_body
* http.response_headers
* http.response_headers.raw
* http.response_body
* http.response_cookie

All the HTTP buffers have a limitation: only one can be inspected by a
script at a time.

Match function
--------------

.. code-block:: lua

  function match(args)
      a = tostring(args["http.request_line"])
      if #a > 0 then
          if a:find("^POST%s+/.*%.php%s+HTTP/1.0$") then
              return 1
          end
      end

      return 0
  end

The script can return 1 or 0. It should return 1 if the condition(s)
it checks for match, 0 if not.

Entire script:

.. code-block:: lua

  function init (args)
      local needs = {}
      needs["http.request_line"] = tostring(true)
      return needs
  end

  function match(args)
      a = tostring(args["http.request_line"])
      if #a > 0 then
          if a:find("^POST%s+/.*%.php%s+HTTP/1.0$") then
              return 1
          end
      end

      return 0
  end

  return 0

Commit message:

lua rule: Updated doc to reflect new behaviour

doc/userguide/rules/rule-lua-scripting.rst, after:

.. _lua-scripting:

Lua Scripting
=============

Syntax:

::

  lua:[!]<scriptfilename>;

The script filename will be appended to either you default rules location, or if it is not found there
it will be appended to the directory where the rule is.

The script has 2 parts, an init function and a match function. First, the init.

Init function
-------------


.. code-block:: lua

  function init (args)
      local needs = {}
      needs["http.request_line"] = tostring(true)
      return needs
  end

The init function registers the buffer(s) that need
inspection. Currently the following are available:

* packet -- entire packet, including headers
* payload -- packet payload (not stream)
* http.uri
* http.uri.raw
* http.request_line
* http.request_headers
* http.request_headers.raw
* http.request_cookie
* http.request_user_agent
* http.request_body
* http.response_headers
* http.response_headers.raw
* http.response_body
* http.response_cookie

All the HTTP buffers have a limitation: only one can be inspected by a
script at a time.

Match function
--------------

.. code-block:: lua

  function match(args)
      a = tostring(args["http.request_line"])
      if #a > 0 then
          if a:find("^POST%s+/.*%.php%s+HTTP/1.0$") then
              return 1
          end
      end

      return 0
  end

The script can return 1 or 0. It should return 1 if the condition(s)
it checks for match, 0 if not.

Entire script:

.. code-block:: lua

  function init (args)
      local needs = {}
      needs["http.request_line"] = tostring(true)
      return needs
  end

  function match(args)
      a = tostring(args["http.request_line"])
      if #a > 0 then
          if a:find("^POST%s+/.*%.php%s+HTTP/1.0$") then
              return 1
          end
      end

      return 0
  end

  return 0
