doc/userguide/upgrade.rst, before:

Upgrading
=========

General instructions
--------------------

Suricata can be upgraded by simply installing the new version to the same
locations as the already installed version. When installing from source,
this means passing the same ``--prefix``, ``--sysconfdir``,
``--localstatedir`` and ``--datadir`` options to ``configure``.

::

    $ suricata --build-info|grep -A 3 '\-\-prefix'
        --prefix                                 /usr
        --sysconfdir                             /etc
        --localstatedir                          /var
        --datarootdir                            /usr/share


Configuration Updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

New versions of Suricata will occasionally include updated config files:
``classification.config`` and ``reference.config``. Since the Suricata
installation will not overwrite these if they exist, they must be manually
updated. If there are no local modifications they can simply be overwritten
by the ones Suricata supplies.

Major updates include new features, new default settings and often also
remove features.

Upgrading 6.0 to 7.0
--------------------

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Upgrade of PCRE1 to PCRE2. See :ref:`pcre-update-v1-to-v2` for more details.

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- The libprelude output plugin has been removed.

Logging changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- IKEv2 Eve logging changed, the event_type has become ``ike``. The fields ``errors`` and ``notify`` have moved to
  ``ike.ikev2.errors`` and ``ike.ikev2.notify``.
- FTP DATA metadata for alerts are now logged in ``ftp_data`` instead of root.

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- NSS is no longer required. File hashing and JA3 can now be used without the NSS compile time dependency.
- If installing Suricata without the bundled Suricata-Update, the ``default-rule-path`` has been changed from ``/etc/suricata/rules`` to ``/var/lib/suricata/rules`` to be consistent with Suricata when installed with Suricata-Update.

Logging changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Protocol values and their names are built-in to Suricata instead of using the system's ``/etc/protocols`` file. Some names and casing may have changed
  in the values ``proto`` in ``eve.json`` log entries and other logs containing protocol names and values.
  See https://redmine.openinfosecfoundation.org/issues/4267 for more information.

Upgrading 5.0 to 6.0
--------------------
- SIP now enabled by default
- RDP now enabled by default
- ERSPAN Type I enabled by default.

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- New protocols enabled by default: mqtt, rfb
- SSH Client fingerprinting for SSH clients
- Conditional logging
- Initial HTTP/2 support
- DCERPC logging
- Improved EVE logging performance

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- File-store v1 has been removed. If using file extraction, the file-store configuration
  will need to be updated to version 2. See :ref:`filestore-update-v1-to-v2`.
- Individual Eve (JSON) loggers have been removed. For example,
  ``stats-json``, ``dns-json``, etc. Use multiple Eve logger instances
  if this behavior is still required. See :ref:`multiple-eve-instances`.
- Unified2 has been removed. See :ref:`unified2-removed`.

Upgrading 4.1 to 5.0
--------------------

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- New protocols enabled by default: snmp (new config only)
- New protocols disabled by default: rdp, sip
- New defaults for protocols: nfs, smb, tftp, krb5 ntp are all enabled
  by default (new config only)
- VXLAN decoder enabled by default. To disable, set
  ``decoder.vxlan.enabled`` to ``false``.
- HTTP LZMA support enabled by default. To disable, set ``lzma-enabled``
  to ``false`` in each of the ``libhtp`` configurations in use.
- classification.config updated. ET 5.0 ruleset will use this.
- decoder event counters use 'decoder.event' as prefix now. This can
  be controlled using the ``stats.decoder-events-prefix`` setting.

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- ``dns-log``, the text dns log. Use EVE.dns instead.
- ``file-log``, the non-EVE JSON file log. Use EVE.files instead.
- ``drop-log``, the non-EVE JSON drop log.

See https://suricata.io/about/deprecation-policy/

Commit message:

log: rename http.xff to http.xff_header
Ticket: 4860

So as to differentiate between .xff which is just one IP,
depending on the configuration first or last, and
.http.xff_header which is the complete header value

doc/userguide/upgrade.rst, after:

Upgrading
=========

General instructions
--------------------

Suricata can be upgraded by simply installing the new version to the same
locations as the already installed version. When installing from source,
this means passing the same ``--prefix``, ``--sysconfdir``,
``--localstatedir`` and ``--datadir`` options to ``configure``.

::

    $ suricata --build-info|grep -A 3 '\-\-prefix'
        --prefix                                 /usr
        --sysconfdir                             /etc
        --localstatedir                          /var
        --datarootdir                            /usr/share


Configuration Updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

New versions of Suricata will occasionally include updated config files:
``classification.config`` and ``reference.config``. Since the Suricata
installation will not overwrite these if they exist, they must be manually
updated. If there are no local modifications they can simply be overwritten
by the ones Suricata supplies.

Major updates include new features, new default settings and often also
remove features.

Upgrading 6.0 to 7.0
--------------------

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Upgrade of PCRE1 to PCRE2. See :ref:`pcre-update-v1-to-v2` for more details.

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- The libprelude output plugin has been removed.

Logging changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- IKEv2 Eve logging changed, the event_type has become ``ike``. The fields ``errors`` and ``notify`` have moved to
  ``ike.ikev2.errors`` and ``ike.ikev2.notify``.
- FTP DATA metadata for alerts are now logged in ``ftp_data`` instead of root.
- HTTP xff header is now logged as ``http.xff_header`` instead of ``http.xff`` while the root object ``.xff`` remains the same

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- NSS is no longer required. File hashing and JA3 can now be used without the NSS compile time dependency.
- If installing Suricata without the bundled Suricata-Update, the ``default-rule-path`` has been changed from ``/etc/suricata/rules`` to ``/var/lib/suricata/rules`` to be consistent with Suricata when installed with Suricata-Update.

Logging changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Protocol values and their names are built-in to Suricata instead of using the system's ``/etc/protocols`` file. Some names and casing may have changed
  in the values ``proto`` in ``eve.json`` log entries and other logs containing protocol names and values.
  See https://redmine.openinfosecfoundation.org/issues/4267 for more information.

Upgrading 5.0 to 6.0
--------------------
- SIP now enabled by default
- RDP now enabled by default
- ERSPAN Type I enabled by default.

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- New protocols enabled by default: mqtt, rfb
- SSH Client fingerprinting for SSH clients
- Conditional logging
- Initial HTTP/2 support
- DCERPC logging
- Improved EVE logging performance

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- File-store v1 has been removed. If using file extraction, the file-store configuration
  will need to be updated to version 2. See :ref:`filestore-update-v1-to-v2`.
- Individual Eve (JSON) loggers have been removed. For example,
  ``stats-json``, ``dns-json``, etc. Use multiple Eve logger instances
  if this behavior is still required. See :ref:`multiple-eve-instances`.
- Unified2 has been removed. See :ref:`unified2-removed`.

Upgrading 4.1 to 5.0
--------------------

Major changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- New protocols enabled by default: snmp (new config only)
- New protocols disabled by default: rdp, sip
- New defaults for protocols: nfs, smb, tftp, krb5 ntp are all enabled
  by default (new config only)
- VXLAN decoder enabled by default. To disable, set
  ``decoder.vxlan.enabled`` to ``false``.
- HTTP LZMA support enabled by default. To disable, set ``lzma-enabled``
  to ``false`` in each of the ``libhtp`` configurations in use.
- classification.config updated. ET 5.0 ruleset will use this.
- decoder event counters use 'decoder.event' as prefix now. This can
  be controlled using the ``stats.decoder-events-prefix`` setting.

Removals
~~~~~~~~
- ``dns-log``, the text dns log. Use EVE.dns instead.
- ``file-log``, the non-EVE JSON file log. Use EVE.files instead.
- ``drop-log``, the non-EVE JSON drop log.

See https://suricata.io/about/deprecation-policy/
